#summary We need a temporary fix for the Ayar font for version 1.8.

= Introduction =

The Ayar Unicode project is another non-compliant encoding of Unicode:
http://code.google.com/p/ayarunicode/

However, it has some distinct advantages over the other "partial Unicode" encodings:
   # It has a very open license (MIT).
   # It is under active development (unlike Zawgyi 2010).
   # It looks nice (as a system font). 
   # It does not use minority code points (like Zawgyi-One, Mya Zedi).
   # Shan/Mon/etc. fonts are under development. 
   # The encoding is fairly sensible; definitely Unicode-inspired. (So, we could conceivably use it as a BMP font with some hacking.)

Given these advantages, the main problem is creating a Transformation. I'd like Ayar to be the first example of a user-written Javascript converter; however, I also want a demo in 1.8. So, we'll just take the Unicode2Zawgyi and build on that for a temporary solution.


= Unicode 2 Ayar =

  * First, we convert to Zawgyi.
  * Then, we have to scan for Zawgyi "syllables" (like we do in the Zawgyi converter). For each syllable:
     * Convert [--္, --်, ျ-, --ြ, --ွ]  [(1039), (103A), (103B), (103C), (103D)] to [(103A), (103B), (103C), (103D), (103E)]
     * If the syllable contains ေ(1031) or ျ (103C), put them in front of the consonant. Put 1031 first.
     * Convert kinzi: (1064) to ????
     * Convert pat-sint: [(1060), (1061), (1062), (1063), (1065), (1066), (1067)]

*TODO:* Right now, we're approaching it wrong.... need to re-think this....



